---
title: TaRu Hardy controller (shooting target controller)
date: 2023-05-05
lastmod: 2023-05-10
tags: ["remote", "controlled", "shooting", "target", "software", "radio"]
draft: false
---


# Remote-controlled shooting targets

My first encounter with remote-controlled and automatically falling (when 
hit) targets was when I was serving as a conscript in the Finnish Defence 
forces (FDF). The target FDF used was called "Jaster" or "Jantteri" and I 
believe it was a domestic product developed exclusively for FDF, since there's 
very little information publicly available about them.

Later in life (in 2021), a similar remote-controllable and automatically 
falling shooting target was introduced to me. The introducers were my friends 
from the reservist association I belong to
([Tapiolan Reserviupseerit](https://tapiolanreserviupseerit.fi/)). The product 
in question was [Eli Hardy](https://eli.ee/products/1/pop-up-target-set-hardy) 
which I thought was Estonians' version of the Finnish Jaster system. While 
introducing Hardy to me, my friends expressed their missatisfaction to Hardy's 
user experience: the targets were controlled by a mil-spec radio transmitter, 
which one can spot from Eli's promotional images on Hardy's product page. The 
user interface of the radio is so abysmal that they requested me to create a 
computer program with a GUI that would have all the functionality that Eli's 
transmitters have. I agreed to do the task!

# Controlling Eli Hardys

Since Eli Hardys are controlled via a radio, the first step was to reverse 
engineer how it is being done. We found out that the radio used in Eli's 
controller was a basic radio modem which eats RS232 and outputs the serial 
data to the readio network. The binary data command structure itself was 
pretty simple, and Hannu Valkonen reverse engineered it for our use. 
Unfortunately I don't have the documentation of the reverse engineering 
process or clear documentation of the command structure with me anymore, but 
the final implementation and reconstruction of Hardy commands can be found 
from the 
[HardyExecutor.cs](https://github.com/jussihi/TaRu_Hardy/blob/master/TaRU_Jaster/HardyExecutor.cs) 
file from the project's Github page. With the help of this source file anyone 
can reimplement the command protocol in their programming language of choice.

# The implementation

I decided to use Micro$oft's C# and .net framework to create the program, 
since it offers a very easy way to create GUI applications for computers 
running Windows as their main OS. If this was a personal project I would've 
surely chosen something different... C# was also an interesting choice, since 
I think it was some 2013 or so when I last programmed anything with C# / .net. 
So it was a nice refresher and learning opportunity, since I don't consider 
myself any good in the C# language. Therefore I will issue a warning here: 
**the code in the repository might be absolutely disgusting to read** if you 
are proficient in C#. Now that I've warned you, here's a link to the project 
and its sources: [TaRu_Hardy on Github](https://github.com/jussihi/TaRu_Hardy).

## User interface
The program is divided into three different tabs: General, 
Program executor/editor, and Options.

### General tab

![General tab](/images/hardy-general.png)

Inside general tab the user can command or setup basic configuration for either 
all or a selected subset of targets. By default, i.e. if no targets are 
selected, the program assumes that the commands/configuration should be set to 
all Hardys it can connect to. From the quick program box the user can setup a 
repeating simple program for the Hardys and start/stop it.

### Scripts tab

![General tab](/images/hardy-scripts.png)

The scripts tab works as an editor for TaRu Hardy controller script (.thcs) 
files. In this tab, one can create simple programs by using a simple 
interpreted "Hardy BASIC" programming language! This BASIC-based language was 
a really fun project to implemet. I used 
[BasicSharp](https://github.com/Timu5/BasicSharp) as a starting point and 
expanded the set of commands (added `sleep` command and some target-specific 
commands such as `reset`, `down`, `up`) to make the Hardy Basic usable for 
target controlling. As an example, a part of the FDF's RK11 shooting test is 
implemented in the script in above picture. The script output and possible 
interpreter errors i.e. syntax errors :-) are printed out to the log window.

### Options tab

![General tab](/images/hardy-options.png)

From the options tab the user can setup a preferred lowest log level to print 
out to the log window and the COM port to be used with the radio. The options 
tab also shows the current status (battery level and settings) and the 
timestamp when any of the aforementioned data was last fetched successfully to 
the TaRu Hardy Controller program. 